---
layout: post
title: The Forgotten History Of CGI
date: 2014-06-04
categories: [computer science]
tags: [computer graphics]

---

## Article Source
* Title: [The Forgotten History Of CGI](http://io9.com/the-forgotten-history-of-cgi-1536941205)
* Authors: [Ron Miller](http://spaceart.kinja.com/)

[![](http://sungsoo.github.com/images/cgi-history.png)](http://sungsoo.github.com/images/cgi-history.png)

---

# The Forgotten History Of CGI


![The Forgotten History Of
CGI](http://i.kinja-img.com/gawker-media/image/upload/s--TaaHK1ID--/c_fit,fl_progressive,q_80,w_636/dmvupqogh2lmdeedjmfo.jpg)S

The roots of CGI lie in the first mechanical aids to drawing and
painting. The earliest of these were developed to help solve a problem
every artist has found to be sticky: perspective.

Before the introduction of geometric perspective, the realistic
depiction of nature was not one of the purposes of art. Instead, artists
chose the size and position of objects in a picture by their relative
importance to one another. A distant castle might appear to be larger
than one in the foreground simply because it was considered more
important.

![The Forgotten History Of
CGI](http://i.kinja-img.com/gawker-media/image/upload/s--qtn6vAVv--/astm2o6exkn56ye4bir7.jpg)

Italian artist Filippo Brunelleschi (1377—1446) created the rules of
perspective in the early fifteenth century. His breakthroughs led
artists to portray the world as it really looked to the human eye. Some
artists, such as Albrecht Durer (1471—1528) of Germany, even went so far
as to make special tools to help them create mathematically perfect
perspective drawings. These were perhaps the first mechanical devices to
be used to create art.

![The Forgotten History Of
CGI](http://i.kinja-img.com/gawker-media/image/upload/s--guMNJ5Py--/c_fit,fl_progressive,q_80,w_320/teu2j3xxvma0x3bdmaak.jpg)S

Most artists quickly adapted these new technologies to create their
artwork. In the ensuing centuries they have used all sorts of machines
to make the creation of art easier. The pantograph, for instance, is a
simple mechanical device that enlarges or reduces a drawing. Pantographs
are not only still used by artists today, they have wide applications in
modern industry as well.

![The Forgotten History Of
CGI](http://i.kinja-img.com/gawker-media/image/upload/s--3rgiaDSM--/c_fit,fl_progressive,q_80,w_320/fonpk40erhr4sgsqthx2.jpg)S

![The Forgotten History Of
CGI](http://i.kinja-img.com/gawker-media/image/upload/s--8hqlvGnJ--/iisu3d4wdjo5nvkikvum.png)

Artists also use a camera obscura ( "dark room" in Latin). The earliest
of these were full-size, light-tight rooms with a small hole in an
outside wall. Visitors would see an image of the surrounding landscape
projected onto the opposite wall. Artists used this concept in a
different way. They reduced the room to a small box with a tiny pinhole
in one side and a white screen opposite to it. When the light from a
scene or model passes through the pinhole, an image is projected onto
the screen. The artist can then easily trace the image. It's still a
valuable tool used by many artists today (who usually shorten the name
to "lucy").

The camera lucida eventually evolved into what we know today as just...

## The Camera 

Occasionally, an innovation is not met with such widespread enthusiasm.
After the invention of photography in the early nineteenth century,
painter Paul Delaroche said that photography "completely satisfies art's
every need." By this he meant that a photograph could do anything an
artist could, so painters would become useless.

Delaroche reflected the feelings of many academic painters, who
supported themselves by making highly lifelike paintings: portraits,
landscapes, historical scenes, and so forth that pleased their rich
patrons. The camera could capture scenes with an accuracy that even the
finest painter could not achieve. Photography was also cheap and could
be done by anyone.

Many artists, though, quickly realized the possibilities of photography,
looking at it not as a rival but as an ally. For example, Eugene
Delacroix (1798—1863) studied the human body by using photographs of the
nude. He also worked from photographs of models when making drawings and
paintings.

![The Forgotten History Of
CGI](http://i.kinja-img.com/gawker-media/image/upload/s--aGP690q2--/cmrzokzfodzgnc8oxg4v.jpg)

Many other artists began doing this too since photos were much easier
than living models, who not only might move while posing but also
charged for their time. (Eadweard Muybridge made this into a science, in
the process laying the foundation for motion pictures...but that's
another story.)

Meanwhile, other artists found it advantageous to let photography take
over the dull depiction of reality. It freed them to explore other
realms of color, light, and composition. Impressionism and other schools
of art that sprang up at the end of the nineteenth century might have
been delayed by decades, if not longer, if not for the liberating
influence of photography.

![The Forgotten History Of
CGI](http://i.kinja-img.com/gawker-media/image/upload/s--iYf8Hhj1--/acwfzyfij7rjgizrt7mf.jpg)

The airbrush was another transformative mechanical innovation. Invented
in 1879 by Abner Peeler, the airbrush uses compressed air to create a
jet of very fine paint particles. By adjusting the amount of air
pressure and the amount of paint, artists can create soft lines and
shapes and blend colors together smoothly. The airbrush also creates
incredible lighting effects. Although a very valuable tool, the airbrush
has taken a great deal of abuse. Traditional painters often consider it
a form of cheating.

Many professional artists dislike that non-artists can easily create
beautiful effects with an airbrush. Unfortunately, the result is often
beautiful effects but very bad art. Airbrush art soon became associated—
unfairly perhaps—with cheap, gaudy, amateur artwork. Although it quickly
became one of the most important tools of modern artists working in
advertising and illustration, most other artists scorned it.

## Mathematics and Art 

![The Forgotten History Of
CGI](http://i.kinja-img.com/gawker-media/image/upload/s--qQdhHLV3--/dxg72ivjmu9zj0jh2xtb.jpg)

Scientists have long exploited the connection between the visual and the
numerical. They have used machines and other devices to translate
numerical data into visual form for more than a century.

![The Forgotten History Of
CGI](http://i.kinja-img.com/gawker-media/image/upload/s--bvsplI4v--/c_fit,fl_progressive,q_80,w_320/thewliw2fbzc84zx5nsd.jpg)S

For instance, in 1787 the German physicist Ernst Chladni found that when
he drew a violin bow against the edge of a metal plate covered with fine
sand,complex patterns would form in the sand. Depending on where the
plate was stroked by the bow, he could create different patterns. The
practical application of Chladni's discovery has been in the design of
musical instruments. But the patterns in themselves are pleasing and are
perhaps one of the earliest examples of machine-generated art.

![The Forgotten History Of
CGI](http://i.kinja-img.com/gawker-media/image/upload/s--l68JFtPW--/a4fv0lfvtjhjmzlfae7r.jpg)

The oscilloscope—which detects electrical pulses and translates them
into waves on a screen—is probably the very earliest electronic machine
developed to translate numerical data to visual form. German scientist
Karl Ferdinand Braun developed the first oscilloscope in 1897. The basic
technology of Braun's invention included the cathode-ray tube—which
eventually became the television tube.

Naturally, some creative minds saw the potential for art in the
oscilloscope's perfectly shaped waves. Since an oscilloscope could
create special wave shapes by changing the data input to the device,
gifted artists could produce spectacular waves of complex lines. But the
only way to save an oscilloscope image was to take a photograph of the
oscilloscope screen.

![The Forgotten History Of
CGI](http://i.kinja-img.com/gawker-media/image/upload/s--p1UBndaZ--/c_fit,fl_progressive,q_80,w_320/ihvte1jxpv9qfqkxraxb.jpg)S

Two devices create patterns like oscilloscopes through purely mechanical
means. The harmonograph was a very popular household item in the late
nineteenth century. It used the principle of the pendulum to make
complex patterns of swirling lines. The simplest harmonograph uses a
pendulum swinging over an area of smooth sand. As the pendulum swings, a
point on the end traces out patterns in the sand. Mathematicians call
these patterns *Lissajous figures*.

![The Forgotten History Of
CGI](http://i.kinja-img.com/gawker-media/image/upload/s--g9EnRIAW--/xhwwyen5no4vfi7yknm0.jpg)

In other versions, the pendulum's bob consisted of a large cone (such as
a paper cup) filled with fine sand. The sand drained from a small hole
in its point. Very complex patterns resulted when several pendulum
actions were combined, such as when one pendulum swung from another. A
harmonograph that creates really complex patterns can be quite
large—though still simple to build.

In 1966 the Kenner toy company introduced the Spirograph in the United
States. The simple toy has several geared plastic wheels and toothed
rings that can create beautiful curves. The toy is based on a type of
mathematical curve called a trochoid. A trochoid is the path of a point
fixed relative to a circle that is rolling along a straight line.

![The Forgotten History Of
CGI](http://i.kinja-img.com/gawker-media/image/upload/s--aDILrcFw--/c_fit,fl_progressive,q_80,w_636/fafsgg41ngawqbb7gzbu.jpg)S

Imagine a reflector attached to one of the spokes of a bicycle wheel.
When the wheel turns, the reflector makes a circle as it rotates around
the hub. But if the bicycle is moving relative to the ground, the
reflector follows a curve that looks like a series of arcs. Imagine the
cyclist was part of a circus act and drove her bike around the inside of
a large curved track. Then the reflector would trace out an even more
complex curve called an epicycloid. If more circles are added, the
curves become even more complex.

## The Computer 

The early computers of the late 1940s and 1950s output data through
typewriter-like devices. This was usually in the form of columns of
numbers and letters. Artist realized these letters and numbers could be
seen as areas of light and dark. For instance, an *m*or *x*looks darker
on the page than an *o, i,*or dot. Pictures could be created if users
fed the right numbers into the computer.

By using combinations of many different characters, users could create
complex and surprisingly realistic images. The process was very similar
to the way black-and-white photos are reproduced in newspapers,
magazines, and books. The photo is broken up into tiny dots. The size of
the dot determines how dark it is. Small dots have a lot of white around
them and look lighter, while larger dots make a space look darker.

A plotter is another device that creates images with the computer. It is
a pen that the computer moves over a sheet of paper in two directions:
up and down and back and forth. By combining these two motions, users
can make the computer draw complex curves. Plotters can produce very
detailed work, as well as work of very large dimensions. People soon
realized that computers could be used to make curves and graphs that
were visually appealing. Thus, the computer might be a tool for creating
art.

## The First Computer Art {data-textannotation-id="36dce645154d5d4b8d7c459582f44e1d"}

The first tools used to make electronic art—a predecessor to digital
art— were originally designed for testing sound equipment. The company
that eventually became Hewlett Packard developed the first of these
products, an audio oscillator. This instrument creates one pure tone, or
frequency, at a time. The waves that this tone produces can be displayed
on the screen of an oscilloscope. The patterns on the oscilloscope
screen give scientists and engineers information about the wave and its
source.

![The Forgotten History Of
CGI](http://i.kinja-img.com/gawker-media/image/upload/s--CdBg33nf--/c_fit,fl_progressive,q_80,w_320/pat6c3um8mxbvcgrmsgn.jpg)S

Ben Laposky, an artist and mathematician from Cherokee, Iowa, realized
that by changing the input he could create patterns of his own design.
In 1950 he created the first graphic images made by an electronic
machine. Laposky captured his electronic oscilloscope imagery by
photographing it onto high-speed film. He called them *oscillons* and
electronic abstractions.

Meanwhile, the Viennese artist Herbert W. Franke also created electronic
images. Franke's images were similar to those of Laposky's but reflected
his own artistic sensibilities and goals. Franke eventually wrote the
first book on digital art: *Computer**Graphics-Computer Art*(1971).

![The Forgotten History Of
CGI](http://i.kinja-img.com/gawker-media/image/upload/s--SoqngAuz--/c_fit,fl_progressive,q_80,w_636/nrnnwtlsgsxkqxm5hgsa.jpg)S

John Whitney Sr., who studied music and photography, closely followed
Laposky's and Franke's work. In the 1940s, Whitney created an
experimental film with his brother James that won first prize at a film
festival in Belgium. His work in 1955 as a director of animation at the
famous UPA cartoon studios led him to a partnership with Saul Bass.
Together they created the title sequence for the Alfred Hitchcock film
*Vertigo*(1958), as well as graphics for television shows.

In 1960 Whitney founded Motion Graphics Incorporated. The company used a
computer to produce motion picture and television sequences and
commercials. Whitney had built the computer himself from war-surplus
electronics. Gradually it evolved into a huge machine that towered 12
feet (3.6 meters) high. Whitney continued to perfect his computer and
the effects it created.

In 1961 Whitney produced a seven-minute color film called *Catalog.*In
this film, he showed all the effects he had perfected with his homemade
computer. Whitney achieved worldwide recognition for his work with the
analog computer. In 1966 IBM awarded him the company's first
artist-in-residence status, allowing him to freely explore the potential
of computer graphics.

## The First Digital Artists 

By the mid-1960s, some artists began to explore ways to combine computer
technology with art. Until then artistical experiments with computers
had been more or less limited to engineers. Only they had the technical
expertise to use computers. The interactive software that is so readily
available in modern times didn't exist. Programs had to be created from
scratch, custom built for each individual computer.

Also, computers were not readily available. Until the 1970s, computers
were enormous and very expensive. For instance, Sketchpad was the first
program specifically designed to create drawings.

![The Forgotten History Of
CGI](http://i.kinja-img.com/gawker-media/image/upload/s--7k2M1Ubv--/skot6owzbnlwbywwwnpx.jpg)

Ivan Sutherland developed the program at the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology (MIT) in 1963 on one of the most advanced computers of the
time. The machine itself occupied 1,000 square feet (93 sq. m) of space.
It had a main memory of 320 kilobytes—that is, about 320,000 units of
information—stored in a memory core about 1 cubic yard (0.8 cu. m) in
size. Users fed the computer programs on a punched paper tape while the
drawings appeared on a 7-inch (18-centimeter) black-and-white monitor.
By comparison, a modern desktop computer that costs only a few hundred
dollars may have up to 200 gigabytes of memory. That's 200 billion
units, more than a quarter million times that of the computer used by
Sketchpad!

In spite of these drawbacks, many artists and scientists became
successful partners in the creation of the first computer-aided artwork.
But this collaboration was long in coming. Scientists held the first
exhibitions of computer art in 1965 and featured only work created by
scientists. Two years later, however, artists Billy Kluver and Robert
Rauschenberg founded an organization called Experiments in Art and
Technology (EAT).The organization, funded in part by Bell Laboratories
(later Luminent), tried to bridge the gap between artists and
scientists. A number of important avant-garde artists, including Robert
Rauschenberg, Andy Warhol, Jasper Johns, and composer John Cage,
contributed work.

The work of these very famous artists could be found in major museums
and galleries all around the world. Not surprisingly, these particular
artists embraced the new technology. Most of them had already been using
new technologies in creating their art, so the move to digital art was
probably both easy and natural. Rauschenberg, for instance, created
elaborate montages with the help of photographic techniques. Warhol
employed the halftone processes used in creating photos in newspapers
and magazines. And John Cage had long been interested in electronic
music. The interest in digital art from these respected artists gave the
form a kind of official seal of approval. People who once scorned the
use of computers in creating art became interested in it.

In 1968 Jasia Reichardt created a two-month-long exhibition called
Cybernetic Serendipity at the Institute of Contemporary Arts in London,
England. It included work by 325 artists and scientists from around the
world, including important work by John Cage, John Whitney Sr., Charles
Csuri, Michael Noll, and many others. After closing in London, the
exhibition went to Washington, D.C., and San Francisco, California.
While not the first such exhibition, it was one of the largest. It made
the art world and the general public fully aware of computer and
electronic art.

In 1968 Hungarian artist Vera Molnar began using the computer to
transform basic geometric shapes, such as squares, circles, and
triangles. She rotated them, deformed them, erased parts, or combined
different shapes into new ones. Then she printed her final results with
a plotter.

![The Forgotten History Of
CGI](http://i.kinja-img.com/gawker-media/image/upload/s--ETABsAOP--/c_fit,fl_progressive,q_80,w_636/kb1uep82zfvnqligfpns.jpg)S

"Proceeding by small steps," she said, "the painter is in a position to
delicately pinpoint the image of dreams. Without the aid of a computer,
it would not be possible to materialize quite so faithfully an image
that previously existed only in the artist's mind. This may sound
paradoxical, but the machine, which is thought to be cold and inhuman,
can help to realize what is most subjective, unattainable, and profound
in a human being."

In 1969 German artist Manfred Mohr turned from traditional painting to
the computer. He worked on variations of the cube, which he distorted
and transformed endlessly. Mohr worked only in black and white, using a
plotter to print his work. In 1971 the Musee d'Art Moderne de laVille de
Paris gave him a one-man show. It was the first such honor from any
museum for a computer artist.

![The Forgotten History Of
CGI](http://i.kinja-img.com/gawker-media/image/upload/s--RwZWQT9y--/c_fit,fl_progressive,q_80,w_320/inidzqlmc0trvw14iqex.jpg)S

Larry Cuba is a widely known pioneer of computer animation. He created
his first film, *First Fig,*in 1974. Computers capable of digital art
were not easy to come by at that time. So Cuba joined with computer
scientists at the National Aeronautics and Space Administration's Jet
Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California. In 1975 John Whitney Sr.
invited Cuba to work with him on the movie *Arabesque.*Later films, such
as *3/78 (Objects and Transformations)*(1978), *Two Space*(1979), and
*Calculated**Movements*(1985) have been shown all over the world.

![The Forgotten History Of
CGI](http://i.kinja-img.com/gawker-media/image/upload/s--DolOPNLT--/c_fit,fl_progressive,q_80,w_320/uydy2ceaewbzc6dlh3na.jpg)S

Lillian Schwartz pioneered the use of computers in graphics, film,
video, animation, special effects, virtual reality, and multimedia. Her
work was the first in the new medium of computer-aided art to be bought
by the Museum of Modern Art in New York. The museum used her sculpture,
*Proxima Centauri,*in its 1968 Machine Exhibition.

Independently and in collaboration with scientists at Bell Labs,
Schwartz later developed ways to use computers in film and animation.
Her award-winning films—such as *Mirage*(1974)—have been shown all over
the world.

![The Forgotten History Of
CGI](http://i.kinja-img.com/gawker-media/image/upload/s--bWV5xrXT--/c_fit,fl_progressive,q_80,w_320/wtngwjwxuu5fzoljnmnx.png)S

Yoichiro Kawaguchi, one of the leading international computer artists,
originally teamed up with computer scientists. With their help, he
developed art using metaballs. This technology, invented by Jim Blinn,
created soft, fluid, organic shapes. Before this, most computer artists
were limited to hard-edged geometric shapes. The patterns Kawaguchi
found in natural forms, such as seashells and plants, inspired him. He
won many international honors and awards for his art and animation.

![The Forgotten History Of
CGI](http://i.kinja-img.com/gawker-media/image/upload/s--H3mTlJCN--/c_fit,fl_progressive,q_80,w_320/xw5dqyudzenlsxvhdixz.jpg)S

Ed Emshwiller is mostly famed as a science-fiction illustrator. He was
also a highly respected video artist and dean of the School of
Film/Video at the California Institute of the Arts in Valencia. He
helped influence the experimental film movement in the 1960s. Many of
his films, including *Thanatopsis*(1962), *Totem*(1963),
*Relativity*(1966), and *Three Dancers*(1970), received awards and
screenings at film festivals in cities around the world. He was quick to
embrace digital technology in the creation of films like
[Sunstone](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8KU-g_zCfIM) (1979).

In 1987 Emshwiller created *Hungers,*an electronic video opera, for the
Los Angeles Arts Festival. *Hungers*combined live performance and
interactive devices that changed the sound of the music according to the
environment. No two performances were exactly alike.

## Fractals 

Another major advance in digital art occurred when mathematicians
discovered fractals. While fractals involve complex math, the basic
concept is simple.

Start with an equilateral triangle. Divide one side of the triangle into
three equal parts, and remove the middle section. Replace it with two
lines the same length as the section you just removed. Do this to all
three sides of the triangle.

![The Forgotten History Of
CGI](http://i.kinja-img.com/gawker-media/image/upload/s--4Sjkjqd5--/c_fit,fl_progressive,q_80,w_320/wdsnumxfyfevcruckpq6.jpg)S

The result will be a six-pointed star. Do this again with the twelve new
sides you've created. And do it again and again . . . The resulting
figure is called a Koch snowflake, after the Swedish mathematician Helge
von Koch, who first described it in 1904.

![The Forgotten History Of
CGI](http://i.kinja-img.com/gawker-media/image/upload/s--ggLYLcmX--/mpmnv7cyjgnj8penneah.jpg)

Fractals are special because they look the same at any scale. A close-up
of any detail of a fractal looks just like a larger section. You can
zoom in as much as you like, and the fractal will always look the same.
Fractals can be found throughout nature. A branch of a tree, for
instance, looks like the entire tree. A rock looks like the mountain it
was found on. The indentations of a coastline seen from space look like
the indentations of a coastline seen from only a few feet away or even
when seen under a magnifying glass.

![The Forgotten History Of
CGI](http://i.kinja-img.com/gawker-media/image/upload/s--LQ5ZEh_v--/tnd50eborrtywwtz23jx.jpg)

For more than half a century, mathematicians working on complex fractals
rarely knew what they might actually look like. Mathematicians were only
able to make rough sketches by hand, so it wasn't possible to make out
their true intricacy. When mathematicians first plotted fractals with
computers in the late 1960s, they finally discovered their amazing
beauty—and artists quickly realized their potential.

In the mid-1970s, Mandelbrot introduced what he called fractal geometry.
With the aid of computer graphics, Mandelbrot showed how his math
formulas could describe complex, irregular natural forms. Examples of
these are the formation of clouds, the distribution of leaves and twigs
on a tree, the shape of a coastline, or the spiraling form of a
seashell. To do this, he had to develop not only new math concepts but
also had to develop some of the first computer programs capable of
printing graphics.

By this time, many artists realized the potential of the computer as a
tool. But the widespread use and development of digital art had to wait
until technicians created software that would work on any computer.
Also, small, less expensive computers had to become widely available.
This did not occur on a wide scale until the 1980s. And we all know what
happened after that.

* * * * *

# Illustration sources:

[Digital
Art](https://www.lernerbooks.com/products/t/8442/9780822575160/digital-art),
Ron Miller (21st Century Books, 2008)

Yoichiro Kawaguchi:
[http://www.cs.otago.ac.nz/graphite/guest...](http://www.cs.otago.ac.nz/graphite/guests.html)

Lillian Schwartz:
[http://thesoundofeye.blogspot.com/2010/04/direct...](http://thesoundofeye.blogspot.com/2010/04/directors-lillian-f.html)

Manfred Mohr: [http://digitalartmuseum.org](http://digitalartmuseum.org)

Vera Molnar: [http://digitalartmuseum.org](http://digitalartmuseum.org)

Herbert Franke:
[http://dam.org/artists/phase-one/herbert-w-franke](http://dam.org/artists/phase-one/herbert-w-franke)