---
layout: post
title: MapGraph
date: 2015-12-21
categories: [computer science]
tags: [big data, graph mining]

---

# MapGraph: A High Level API for Fast Development of High Performance Graph Analytics on GPUs

- Authors: Zhisong Fu, Michael Personick, Bryan Thompson ()SYSTAP, LLC)
- ACM SIGMOD International Conference on Management of Data, 2014


### BibTeX

```
@article{fumapgraph,
   title={MapGraph: A High Level API for Fast Development of High Performance Graph Analytics on GPUs},
   author={Fu, Zhisong and Personick, Michael and Thompson, Bryan}
}
```

[![Download](http://hgpu.org/_files/tech_images/d.gif)](https://www.blazegraph.com/whitepapers/MapGraph-SIGMOD-2014.pdf)
[Download
(PDF)](https://www.blazegraph.com/whitepapers/MapGraph-SIGMOD-2014.pdf)   [![View](http://hgpu.org/_files/tech_images/v.gif)](http://docs.google.com/viewer?url=https://www.blazegraph.com/whitepapers/MapGraph-SIGMOD-2014.pdf)
[View](http://docs.google.com/viewer?url=https://www.blazegraph.com/whitepapers/MapGraph-SIGMOD-2014.pdf)   [![Source](http://hgpu.org/_files/tech_images/i.gif)](https://www.blazegraph.com/product/gpu-accelerated/)
[Source](https://www.blazegraph.com/product/gpu-accelerated/)   [![Source
codes](http://hgpu.org/img/codes.gif)](http://sourceforge.net/projects/mpgraph/files/latest/download)
[Source
codes](http://sourceforge.net/projects/mpgraph/files/latest/download)

<iframe width="600" height="400" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/X1wEO9EGKxE" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

## Package:

[MapGraph: Massively Parallel Graph processing on
GPUs](http://sourceforge.net/projects/mpgraph/)

High performance graph analytics are critical for a long list of
application domains. In recent years, the rapid advancement of many-core
processors, in particular graphical processing units (GPUs), has sparked
a broad interest in developing high performance parallel graph programs
on these architectures. However, the SIMT architecture used in GPUs
places particular constraints on both the design and implementation of
the algorithms and data structures, making the development of such
programs difficult and time-consuming. We present MapGraph, a high
performance parallel graph programming framework that delivers up to 3
billion Traversed Edges Per Second (TEPS) on a GPU. MapGraph provides a
high-level abstraction that makes it easy to write graph programs and
obtain good parallel speedups on GPUs. To deliver high performance,
MapGraph dynamically chooses among different scheduling strategies
depending on the size of the frontier and the size of the adjacency
lists for the vertices in the frontier. In addition, a Structure Of
Arrays (SOA) pattern is used to ensure coalesced memory access. Our
experiments show that, for many graph analytics algorithms, an
implementation, with our abstraction, is up to two orders of magnitude
faster than a parallel CPU implementation and is comparable to
state-of-the-art, manually optimized GPU implementations. In addition,
with our abstraction, new graph analytics can be developed with
relatively little effort.



Tags: [Computer science](http://hgpu.org/?tag=computer-science),
[CUDA](http://hgpu.org/?tag=cuda),
[nVidia](http://hgpu.org/?tag=nvidia),
[Algorithms](http://hgpu.org/?tag=algorithms), [Graph
theory](http://hgpu.org/?tag=graph-theory),
[Package](http://hgpu.org/?tag=package), [Tesla
K20](http://hgpu.org/?tag=tesla-k20)



