---
layout: post
title: Top AI and Machine Learning Conferences in 2017
date: 2017-04-09
categories: [computer science]
tags: [machine learning]

---

## Article Source

* Title: [17 Top AI and Machine Learning Conferences for Developers in 2017](https://www.ibm.com/blogs/watson/2017/01/17-top-ai-machine-learning-conferences-developers-2017/)
* Authors: [Zach Tomlinson](https://www.ibm.com/blogs/watson/author/zach_tomlinson/)

---

17 Top AI and Machine Learning Conferences for Developers in 2017 
======


[![DevCon](https://www.ibm.com/blogs/watson/wp-content/uploads/2017/01/DevCon.jpg)](https://www.ibm.com/blogs/watson/wp-content/uploads/2017/01/DevCon.jpg)

Whether you’re interested in cognitive computing, artificial
intelligence or machine learning, you probably know that the fourth
industrial revolution is well underway and accelerating rapidly. The
speed of change presents a challenge to developers who want to stay
abreast of the latest ideas and approaches. Conferences, workshops and
other meetings provide opportunities to learn where the jobs and
technology is headed and a chance to learn and practice the skills
necessary to keep up.

Here are 17 events on AI and machine learning that developers should
consider attending this year (in chronological order):

## 1. AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

**San Francisco, CA**

**Feb. 4–9, 2017**

[**http://www.aaai.org/Conferences/AAAI/aaai17.php**](http://www.aaai.org/Conferences/AAAI/aaai17.php)

Why you should attend: AI engineers, practitioners, researchers and
scientists will discuss the latest developments in the field, while
tutorials and workshops will give attendees a chance to hone their
skills. Speakers will be drawn from a wide variety of sectors, including
Microsoft, MIT, the National Science Foundation and NASA Ames Research
Center.

## 2. DeveloperWeek Conference and Expo

**San Francisco, CA**

**Feb. 11–16, 2017**

**<http://www.developerweek.com/>**

Why you should attend: Part of DeveloperWeek will be a two-day
conference on Artificial Intelligence, consisting of both technical
presentations and thought leadership talks. The focus will be on
cognitive computing, audio and video recognition, the relationship
between machine learning and AI and more. Workshops and bootcamps will
provide experience with development tools, while a hackathon will add a
competitive flavor.

## 3. Domino Data Science Pop-Up

**San Francisco, CA** 
**Feb. 22, 2017**

**<https://popup.dominodatalab.com>**

Domino Data Lab created the Data Science Pop-up series to bring
together quantitative researchers who are passionate about asking the
right questions and identifying problems worth solving. The goal is to
present real stories about the cutting edge work being done today. The
event is a day-long forum where people share ideas, develop best
practices, and network with others in their field.

![Screen Shot 2017-01-31 at 2.57.30 PM](https://www.ibm.com/blogs/watson/wp-content/uploads/2017/01/Screen-Shot-2017-01-31-at-2.57.30-PM.png)

## 4. Machine Intelligence Summit

**San Francisco, CA**

**March 23–24, 2017**

**<https://www.re-work.co/events/machine-intelligence-summit-san-francisco-2017>**

Why you should attend: The focus of this Summit is “the rise of
intelligent machines to make sense of data.” “Deep-dive workshops” will
give attendees the opportunity to explore specific topics, from natural
language processing to pattern recognition. Speakers include development
engineers and scientists from top Bay Area companies such as Flickr,
Airbnb and Pandora.

## 5. The Machine Learning Conference

**New York, NY**

**March 24, 2017**

**(Other Machine Learning Conferences will be in Seattle on May 19,
Atlanta on Sept. 15 and San Francisco on Nov. 10)** 

**<http://mlconf.com>**

Why you should attend: The MLconf, which began as a partnership with
Carnegie Mellon University’s GraphLab, focuses on solutions to
organizing and analyzing large, noisy data sets. Speakers from various
industries (including, in New York, a research engineer from Facebook
and a machine learning engineer from Meetup) will discuss their methods
and practices.

## 6. International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and
Applications (AIAPP 2017)

**Geneva, Switzerland**

**March 25-26, 2017**

**<http://cosit2016.org/2017/aiapp2017/index.html>**

Why you should attend: Researchers and scientists will be joined by
engineers to discuss the entire range of practical and theoretical
aspects of AI. Papers presented will discuss research projects and
real-world experiences in topics including automatic control, data
mining, semantic technologies, theories of learning, cognitive
informatics and more.

## 7. The AI Summit

**London, UK**

**May 9–10, 2017**

**<https://theaisummit.com/london/>**

(Other Summits will be in Hong Kong on July 26, San Francisco Sept. 27-28 and New York Dec. 6-7)

Why you should attend: Attendees at the Summit conference and exhibition
will learn how large enterprises are implementing real-world solutions
to improve their productivity. Speakers will present case studies and
practical applications in a wide range of industries, such as retail,
energy, finance and banking, telecommunications, transportation and
media.

<iframe width="600" height="400" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/j7lo5QIJHbI" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

## 8. Applied Artificial Intelligence Conference 2017

**San Francisco, CA**

**May 11, 2017**

**<http://bootstraplabs.com/artificial-intelligence/applied-artificial-intelligence-conference-2017/>**

Why you should attend: Focused on practical applications and commercial
opportunities for AI, the Applied AI Conference will present specific
tools and methods for implementing the technology. The host, Bootstrap
Labs, is an investor in applied Artificial Intelligence technologies, so
the conference will be a good place to get an overview of current and
future opportunities for developers.

## 9. The AI Conference

**San Francisco, CA**

**June 2, 2017**

**<https://aiconference.ticketleap.com/helloworld/details>**

The Artificial Intelligence Conference is an annual event where leading
AI researchers and top industry practitioners meet and collaborate. The
AI Conference brings together professionals for several industries that
are currently being transformed by the recent breakthroughs of
Artificial Intelligence.

## 10. AI and Machine Learning World 2017

**London, UK**

**June 13–15, 2017**

**<https://tmt.knect365.com/ai-machine-learning-world/>**

Why you should attend: What does AI mean for the future of enterprises?
That’s the question addressed by the AI and Machine Learning World
conference, which will feature demos and case studies, as well as
discussions about the use of unmanned aerial vehicles (drones) and
robots. There will also be presentations concentrating on AI in specific
industries.

## 11. The O’Reilly Artificial Intelligence Conference

**New York, NY**

**June 26–29, 2017** 

**<https://conferences.oreilly.com/artificial-intelligence/ai-ny>**

Why you should attend: The O’Reilly conference focuses on applied AI,
specifically on the way the technology is becoming a key part of the
developer’s toolkit. The conference will examine real-world business
examples, relying on case studies and best practices to uncover AI’s
potential. Developers will leave with an increased understanding of how
to use AI in their own projects.

![Screen Shot 2017-01-31 at 3.06.00 PM](https://www.ibm.com/blogs/watson/wp-content/uploads/2017/01/Screen-Shot-2017-01-31-at-3.06.00-PM.png)

## 12. International Conference on Machine Learning and Data Mining (MLDM 2017)

**New York, NY**

**July 15–20, 2017**

**<http://www.mldm.de/index.php>**

Why you should attend: As the title says, the emphasis of this
conference is on the role of AI in data mining, particularly in the
fields of multimedia, biomed and web mining. Data mining tools and
applications will be on display in an exhibition hall, and tutorials
will help developers get up to speed as necessary.

## 13. International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI)
Melbourne, Australia

**Aug. 19–25, 2017**

**<http://ijcai-17.org/index.html>**

Why you should attend: The IJCAI conference, first held in 1969, is
centered around a series of workshops on specific topics. This year,
those include a Workshop on Cognitive Knowledge Acquisition and
Applications (Cognitum 2017) and one on Cognition and Artificial
Intelligence for Human-Centered Design. The latter will focus on AI
support for next-generation design technologies.

## 14. Intelligent Systems Conference 2017 (IntelliSys 2017)

**London, UK**

**Sept. 7–8, 2017**

**<http://saiconference.com/IntelliSys2017>**

Why you should attend: At IntelliSys 2017, researchers, scientists,
practitioners and industry experts will examine the fundamentals of AI
as well as how it applies in the real world. The AI track will cover
such topics as fuzzy logic, neural networks and expert systems, while
the ML track will explore natural language processing, supervised and
unsupervised learning, decision-making and more.

## 15. World of Watson – 2017

**Las Vegas, NV**

**Oct. 29 – Nov. 2, 2017**

**<http://www-01.ibm.com/software/events/wow/>**

The largest cognitive technology and AI conference in the U.S., World of
Watson hosted by IBM includes a “Cognitive Concourse,” multiple
keynotes, innovation talks and spotlight sessions by industry experts
and business leaders. There will also be 200+ hands-on labs and
developer certifications. See for yourself how to differentiate your
business and transform customers’ lives. From photo-journalistic
storytelling to the immersion of virtual reality, to cognitive
autonomous vehicles to next-gen drone photography, you will be inspired
to accelerate their own cognitive journeys, transforming your industries
and our society. A chance to experience these new technologies,
hands-on.

<iframe width="600" height="400" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/zmKHzUI7jSY" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

## 16. International Joint Conference on Computational Intelligence
(IJCCI)

**Funchal, Madeira, Portugal**

**Nov. 1-3, 2017**

**<http://www.ijcci.org>**

Why you should attend: The IJCCI will feature four tracks, including one
devoted to Cognitive and Hybrid Systems. Topics will include knowledge
and skill acquisition, bio-inspired cognitive architectures, emulation
of cognitive functions and cognitive software systems. Applications
covered will include pattern recognition, decision-making,
human-computer interaction. Workshops and tutorials will help developers
hone their skills.

## 17.  SGAI International Conference on Artificial Intelligence
(AI-2017)

**Cambridge, UK**

**Dec. 12–14, 2017**

**<http://www.bcs-sgai.org/ai2017/>**

Why you should attend: The SGAI conference will feature invited and
refereed papers on both the technology and applications sides of AI. The
conference begins with a day of tutorials and workshops. The remaining
two days offer two tracks; the application track will enable developers
to learn from recent successes and failures in the field.

IBM Watson is working with businesses, scientists, researchers, and
governments to outthink our biggest challenges with AI, machine learning
and cognitive technologies that are more accessible than ever to every
business, large or small. To learn more about Watson’s cognitive
solutions and APIs [read more on this blog](https://www.ibm.com/blogs/watson/) or [sign up for a free trial](https://www.ibm.com/watson/?cm_mmc=OSocial_Blog-_-Leadership+Agenda_IBM+Watson+Core-_-WW_WW-_-Tech+trends+Report+2017&cm_mmca1=000007CG&cm_mmca2=10002922&) on
our website.
