---
layout: post
title: Data, not algorithms, is key to machine learning success
date: 2017-03-05
categories: [computer science]
tags: [machine learning]

---


## Article Source
* Title: [Data, not algorithms, is key to machine learning success ](http://versionone.vc/data-not-algorithms-is-key-to-machine-learning-success/)
* Authors: Boris

---


Data, not algorithms, is key to machine learning success 
========================================================


There has been an explosion in machine learning activity, and Shivon
Zilis recently mapped out the current [machine intelligence
ecosystem](https://www.oreilly.com/ideas/the-current-state-of-machine-intelligence-2-0)
as we enter 2016. This is one of the key areas that we’ll be following
this year.

![](https://d3ansictanv2wj.cloudfront.net/mi-landscape-2.0-r9_update-f2048bd678f522066e294ba8233b6615.jpg)

While the opportunities here are tremendous, the exuberance surrounding
machine learning distracts startups from a key hurdle: it’s data, not
algorithms, that will dictate who wins in this space. Algorithms have
largely been commoditized by now, so a machine learning company built
around publicly accessible data isn’t defensible.

Access to unique data isn’t a problem for incumbents like Google,
Facebook, and Amazon. But, startups face a serious chicken and egg
problem: they have to convince people to give them data, but the machine
intelligence service won’t be useful until people (and a lot of people)
are actually using the service and sharing their data. Matt Turck
recently wrote about this “cold start” problem in a great post, [“The
Power of Data Network
Effects](http://mattturck.com/2016/01/04/the-power-of-data-network-effects/).”

I’ve seen recommendation services struggle with this challenge. It takes
too long to train the bots and users drop off the platform before the
service gets valuable.

Does this mean that startups can’t successfully play in the machine
learning space? Not necessarily. First of all, there’s plenty of data
out there. Likewise, there are plenty of opportunities to leverage
machine intelligence to solve a business problem or improve day to day
life. The key is to build a strong enough use case that compels people
to give up their data before the benefits of machine learning and data
network effects really kick in.

Turck talks about the “data trap” strategy where startups build fun and
free side apps to start gathering data. A great example is
[Clarifai](http://www.clarifai.com/), a deep learning and image
recognition company. Clarifai’s free consumer app,
[Forevery](https://itunes.apple.com/app/apple-store/id1005812175?mt=8),
offers instant value for its users, by making it easier to organize and
find photos. With each new Forevery user, Clarifai has a bigger data
pool to refine its image recognition technology.

Mint.com is another example where users gave access to very valuable and
unique data, even though Mint didn’t do much on the machine learning
front in the beginning.

The first step is to develop some kind of data acquisition strategy. The
next step is to effectively communicate the value proposition. The focus
has to be on tangible benefits for the end users, rather than the
coolness of the technology platform. In Zilis’ summary of today’s
machine learning ecosystem, she noted that “many machine intelligence
companies have figured out that they need to speak the language of
solving a business problem.” That’s a great sign.

The bottom line is that if startups want to succeed in machine learning,
their top priority should be building proprietary data sets. Creating a
strong use case is the most effective strategy to get that data set.
It’s not easy, but the good news is that it’s incredibly hard to unseat
a service once data network effects kick in.

---

<span style="text-decoration: underline;">Follow-up note:</span>

I have been getting a lot of feed-back on the post: while the thesis of
data over algorithms is true for most machine learning applications,
there are two scenarios in which algorithms are very important:
a) situations with limited data in which you try to learn the most in
minimum time with minimum data and b) very complex data (e.g. computer
vision applications). In both scenarios, deep learning algorithms can
make a significant difference.

